[MUSIC PLAYING]
NARRATOR: As China has begun
to open her cultural doors,
we have been introduced
to fascinating
medical alternative,
such as acupuncture
and herbal remedies.
Now another highly effective
treatment system has arrived.
It's called qigong, a 5,000
year old healing modality
which may soon change the face
of health care for Westerners
in the 21 century.
On the surface,
qigong is an exercise
that builds the immune system
and strengthens the body
through a series of
slow, yoga or tai
chi like movements,
performed in synchrony
with deep breathing rhythms.
Upon closer inspection,
qigong reveals
itself to be a
self-healing tool using
a moving form of meditation.
The practitioners carry to
an intimate understanding
of the connection with
nature, the universe,
and other human beings.
Realizing this connection comes
with understanding the essence
of qi, the vital life
force energy that
animates the human organism.
According to traditional
Chinese medicine theory,
qi is derived from the air
we breathe, the food we eat,
and the environment
in which we live.
Qigong is not limited
to a self-healing system
but is also a treatment method
for healing others on a body,
mind, and soul level.
Qigong's deep breathing and
gentle exercise techniques
improve our health by
vitalizing our tissues, organs,
and muscles, and bones,
relieving pain, eliminating
stress, and strengthening
our ability to emit
qi for use in healing others.
In the past, qigong
techniques were kept secret
and focused only
by martial artists
and the wealthy elite of China.
Since the Cultural
Revolution, scientific studies
have shown qigong can be a
cure for diseases ranging
from hypertension to cancer.
Over 80 million people
practice this health
care system each day in China.
For the world's most
populated country,
qigong seems to be
the only financially
viable health care option.
For Westerners who was
searching for alternatives
to conventional medicine,
qigong may be the key to a more
complete system of healing.
The result of regular
qigong practice
is a peaceful mind, a healthy
invigorated body, and the calm
spirit that is more capable
of dealing with daily stresses
and disease.
This documentary will take you
inside the fascinating health
care system of qigong.
We will look through
the eyes of history,
exploring its religious
and cultural evolution.
And then through the eyes
of some contemporary qigong
masters, we will see how the
current trend in searching
for an effective, low
cost health care strategy
is helping to create
a place for qigong
in our future, a future
that puts health care back
in the hands of the individual.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
NARRATOR: Not all Chinese
accept the claims of qigong
on face value.
To some, it's simply
an antiquated practice
based on superstitious beliefs.
And in a country that is rapidly
embracing things Western,
the old is being discarded
at an alarming rate.
And what may seem
counter to this trend,
teams of Western
trained medical doctors
are taking a serious look
at the potential for qigong
to play a vital role
in the increasingly
demanding health care
needs of the world's
most populous country.
In the heart of Shanghai,
China's largest city, Drs.
Wang and Xu have amassed the
most thoroughly tested data
in the world on the
effects of qigong
for treating hypertension.
Their 30-year study
shows conclusive evidence
that qigong can indeed
lower high blood pressure.
DR WANG: [SPEAKING CHINESE]
INTERPRETER: Our
physicians prescribe herbs,
lifestyle changes, and then
various qigong exercises.
We saw that blood pressure was
controlled and quality of life
went up.
According to traditional
Chinese medicine,
different people and
different symptoms
require different
qigong exercises.
But all qigong systems
have three common aspects,
regulation of the
posture for relaxation,
regulation of the mind, and
regulation of breathing.
We think qigong cure every
kind of disease, some
responding better than others.
NARRATOR: Across town at the
Shanghai Qigong Institute,
government funded
research is carried out
to discover how qigong
can be successfully
incorporated into the country's
social health care system.
Dr. Sheng Kang Yi studies
qigong from a renowned master
who lives far up
in the mountains
and works long days putting
these findings to use
in the clinic at the Institute.
INTERPRETER: The only
thing we research now
is the effects of
qigong on patients,
since no device can measure qi.
We compare groups treated
with and without qigong.
And we see very
positive results.
It is this kind of research that
will help Westerners believe.
NARRATOR: In the
capital city of Beijing,
Dr. Wu Jin, a western
trained physician
and a qigong practitioner,
heads up research
at the Xi Yuan Hospital.
Although our cameras were
not allowed on the facility,
Dr. Wu shares her
groundbreaking work.
DR WU JIN: [SPEAKING CHINESE]
INTERPRETER: After
you're working for years
with many, many patients
at the hospital,
we have conclusive
evidence that qigong
can assist in treatment recovery
of nearly every disease.
Post-operative recovery time
was shortened dramatically
in patients that used
qigong over patients
that recovered with
standard Western techniques.
NARRATOR: In Purple Bamboo
Park, hidden amidst the hustle
and bustle of Beijing, a loyal
group of terminally ill cancer
patients has formed a club.
Frustrated by the
hopelessness they felt
from their Western
trained physicians,
they follow a technique
of walking qigong,
developed by the
late Dr. Guo Lin,
in hopes of reversing
their illness.
Master Li Xu Wang learned
directly from Mrs. Guo Lin, who
suffer from urigenital
cancer and was told she would
only have a few weeks to live.
Dr. Guo Lin lived 20
more healthy years,
devoting her life to giving
hope to cancer patients.
These club members have all
outlived their own terminal
diagnosis by many years.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
NARRATOR: The actually word
qigong was only coined in 1962.
But the principles
upon which it is based
are found in records
thousands of years old.
In an ancient tomb, these
items are buried in hopes
that a deceased, a
wealthy nobleman,
would have good
in the afterlife.
This tortoise shell has
survived nearly 3,000 years
to tell us through its ancient
inscriptions that people
of that time believed
deep breathing
and specific stretching
exercises would
infuse them with
the energy of qi
and keep them healthy and vital.
These drawings dated to
be about 2,500 years old,
show ancient doayin movements.
They're part of a
stylized tribal dance
that helped alleviate
aches and pains,
presumably from
rheumatoid arthritis that
was common with workers
in the rice paddies
and in other damp conditions.
These dances were
eventually broken down
into specific moves
that are prescribed
for different ailments.
Another way that the
principles of deep breathing
and mobilizing internal
energy was applied
was in the area of
military battle.
Systems like wuji qigong
trace their origins
to secret techniques and
exercises coveted by warriors
to make them better soldiers.
At the Shaolin Temple, a
reviewed 1,500 year old
Buddhist stronghold in Henan
Province, the gentle monks
eventually became
known across the nation
for their extraordinary
skills in battle.
Originally, this Chan
sect of Buddhists,
we are more familiar with this
Japanese offshoot known as Zen,
live ascetic lives and consume
their time in deep sedentary
meditation on the Buddha,
a qigong that focused
on building a strong spirit.
SHI DE REN: [SPEAKING CHINESE]
INTERPRETER: The average man
thinks of so many things.
He must sit and not
think of anything
if he is to be truly healthy.
If you're sick, don't think
of it or identify with it.
Sit and meditate, relax, take
your mind off the sickness.
Everything belongs to qigong.
If I return to the natural
time and world, I will be free.
Just like a point has three
world coordinates, if I'm free,
I can move into
unlimited time and space.
NARRATOR: In 515 AD,
the Indian holy man
Bodhidharma happened upon the
temple after a long journey.
He climbed to the
top of Song Mountain
and for nine years remained
in seclusion inside the cave.
When he emerged, he began
to teach the Shaolin monks
a complete system of
movement based on the way
animals move in nature.
He frowned their sitting
qigong meditation,
speaking of how to
qi became stagnant
and how this would
lead to ill health.
His forms became the foundation
of the Shaolin Kung Fu fighting
style that brought notoriety and
political favor to the temple.
The core of the
fighting techniques
lie in qigong breathing and
energy focusing principles.
Bodhidharma, coming from
India, brought ancient Hindu
yoga techniques with him.
And it appears that
some of these premises
are incorporated
into Chinese qigong.
Thousands of qigong styles
developed over the millennia.
Some evolving into formalized
routines that have become
known as Tai Chi.
Qigong is considered
the core of both Tai
Chi and the martial arts.
Its fundamental
premise is to use
the address to
focus and mobilize
energy throughout the body.
Another influence on the
development of qigong in China
was Daoism.
Daoism is an ancient
philosophical belief system
with roots that go
back thousands of years
to the writings of the
Chinese sage, named Lao Tzu.
Lao Tzu and his
students lived in a time
of great social unrest in China.
They promoted a
balanced lifestyle that
adhered to the laws of nature.
Observing the world
around them, Daoists
believed that their actions
should harmonize with nature,
reflecting the way
water flows gently
around obstructions or the way
willows bend in the breeze.
Their ceremonies
honor various spirits
and guardians who are infused
with supernatural powers.
Watching the activities of
animals and celestial bodies
became their inspiration
for living a virtuous life
and would serve to create
a whole style of qigong
that focused on balance
and building a strong body.
Dayan qigong, a Daoist
style performed here
by Master Fan Fu
Xing of Xian, is
named after the big wild goose.
And its forms reflect
the natural grace
at this beautiful bird.
As the goose is a
symbol of longevity,
Master Fan says that
this system will
bring the practitioner good
health and a long life.
Over 1 million Chinese
currently practice this
400-year-old qigong system.
Buddhism and Daoism
are consider the two
pillars that support
the philosophy
of the Chinese people.
Their combined
influence works together
to create a complete
way of thinking
that has molded the evolution
of qigong over the millennia.
Qigong is more than
a set of exercises.
It is an attitude that works to
restructure one's perspective
on life, leading to
balance and harmony
with the world around us.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
NARRATOR: As the
Dao teaches, life
is an ever changing process.
The beginning of this
century saw China
in a state of moral and
social decay, civil infighting
and eventually war with Japan.
The hope for a unified
and stronger country
led to the Cultural
Revolution, which
would dramatically force
people to reevaluate
their traditional way of life.
Ancient practices,
such as qigong, which
were feared as old fashioned,
were outlawed and forced
underground.
Many masters left the man,
as did the nationalist leader
Chiang Kai-Shek.
For others the practice of
this ancient healing system
stopped altogether, as
intellectuals, monks,
and professionals were
persecuted and forced
into hard labor on
farms and in factories.
When the Cultural Revolution
came to an end in 1976
with Chairman Mao's
death, China once again
opened its doors to the West
and to its own cultural past.
Ironically, it was
Mao himself who
instigated research in
qigong to test its viability.
Evidence was overwhelming
that this health
care modality would actually be
a great benefit to the people.
Its easy to learn techniques
and ability to maintain
health at a low cost brought
it great favor in a country
with over 1 billion
people and a government
responsible for
socialized medical care.
For this reason,
qigong has continued
to be heavily
researched and promoted
by the government of China.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
NARRATOR: The traditional
method of learning
qigong is from a
master, a teacher who
has experienced in
part the subtleties
of their unique system.
One of these great elder
masters is Duan Zhi Liang.
He has lived most of
his 90 years in Beijing.
His teacher, in keeping with
tradition, was his grandfather.
His father was a guard
of the Forbidden City,
as was his grandfather
and great grandfather,
who are both doctors.
While they protected
the last emperor,
young Duan played
in the courtyard
and learned the
ways of the warrior.
The Duan family holds the
lineage for the wuji style
of qigong, which dates
back to the 8th century,
as noted in this ancient
tablet, located in Xi'an.
The tablet, known
as [INAUDIBLE],
was discovered
along the Silk Road
and records the interactions
between the Chinese
and Christians
traveling from the West.
Master Duan, like his
family, is a devout Catholic.
And his unique form
of qigong encompasses
the Daoist and
Buddhists beliefs as
well as Christian principles.
Although qigong
is not a religion
and requires no change
in the belief system,
the balance and peace
one feels after doing
these exercises will extend
to all aspects of one's life.
Master Duan, who has
been studying wuji qigong
in martial arts since
he was seven years old,
is a doctor of traditional
Chinese medicine,
who is renowned for his
compassion and generosity.
He typically charges 10
yuan, which is about one US
dollar for a qigong treatment.
Master Duan incorporates
acupuncture,
moxibustion, and tui
na massage techniques
with his wuji qigong.
This means he uses his own
wei qi, or emitted energy,
to restore balance
in his patients.
It is believed that these
energy imbalances lead
to all illnesses and ailments.
As with all great
qigong masters,
the power of their balanced
qi and what they collect
from nature actually
catalyzes and promotes
healing in their patients.
To build up his own qi
and to maintain his health
and mental balance, Master
Duan practices wuji qigong
for one hour each morning.
This is followed by a strenuous
Kung Fu workout, where
this 90-year-old
master routinely
spars with other masters
and students 1/3 his age.
Master Duan's wuji qigong
is an easy to learn
system that is comprised
of 18 individual forms.
Each form is
designed to energize
different internal organs
and promote qi energy
flow throughout the body.
Stretching in various
ways both loosens
the muscles and tendons,
while stimulating
the 12 acupuncture meridians.
This helps to
unlock stagnant qi,
believed to be the root of
physical and mental problems.
Wuji qigong has its
roots in sword fighting,
the Duan family specialty.
Most of the moves are focused on
loosening up and strengthening
the shoulders, neck, and wrists,
keys to winning in battle,
and coincidentally,
key trouble spots
for modern day computer users.
Curiously, Master Duan believes
one cannot be a good fighter
without being a good healer.
On the battlefield,
a warrior must
be adept at tending to
his own wounds and those
of his fellow soldiers.
The powerful
techniques of qigong
were thus coveted
as secret knowledge,
since holding this
information meant
having the competitive edge.
Even with his deep honor
of traditional ways,
Master Duan's magic lies in
his incredible flexibility.
His openness to new ideas and
willingness to grow and learn
is what he says keeps
him young at heart.
It is also the essence
of his qigong teacher.
Master Duan believes
that practicing
the slow and specific
moves of qigong
helps us to remember
that we are all
connected through a singular,
infinite energy, he call wuji.
He believes that understanding
the concept of chaos in nature
will help us with
all we encounter.
MASTER DUAN ZHI LIANG:
[SPEAKING CHINESE]
INTERPRETER: The essence
of all evolution in nature
emerges from chaos.
By understanding the infinite
energy that is always
available to us, we
can flow naturally
with the chaotic
rhythms of the universe.
Try to avoid patterns
and repetition,
mix things up, and
let qi flow smoothly.
Remain flexible and
relax in all you do.
This is to truly
understand qigong.
NARRATOR: Master Duan
says experiencing
the deep and synchronized
breathing of qigong
connects us to the
original breath
that created the universe.
A true master, Duan Zhi Liang
is consumed with his passion.
He teaches constantly
at parks around the city
and has recently started
teaching foreign doctors.
His wife a 45 years works with
him, as she is also a well
respected teacher and healer.
The balance of this time is
spent treating patients in one
of his two simple
qigong clinics,
located in impoverished
neighborhoods in Beijing.
He chooses to share
his vast knowledge
with a wonderful sense
of humor and joy.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
NARRATOR: On the
outskirts of Beijing
is a unique clinic, specializing
in bone setting, of what we
may think of as a combination
of chiropractic and physical
therapy.
It's a family-run
business founded
by the 92-year-old Master Luo,
a matriarch of a healing dynasty
that spans five generations.
Dozens of family
members work together.
Her son, the clinic's director,
is a western trained physician
and a qigong master himself.
Master Luo practices a
unique style of qigong
that focuses on using
qi in conjunction
with subtle bone
manipulations to cure
a variety of physical ailments,
ranging from common emergencies
to various chronic
pain syndromes.
An average of 80 patients come
to this little clinic each day.
Master Luo charges a
dollar or two per treatment
and still uses the same little
stick to transmit qi, as she
has for the past 70 years.
Since the age of 10, er life
has been based on a devotion
to helping people in pain.
MASTER LUO YOU MING:
[SPEAKING CHINESE]
INTERPRETER: One must be good
for the country, for others.
It keeps you healthy and young.
Some patients are rich.
Some are poo.
But you must treat
them the same way.
Everything I do is for
the good of the people.
NARRATOR: By focusing qi
and her healing intention
through her stick
or thumb, she's
able to ease pain,
realign spines,
and reset dislocated joints.
MASTER LUO YOU MING:
[SPEAKING CHINESE]
INTERPRETER: I have a
very experienced thumb.
I've used my big finger
for more than 70 years.
It is very important.
If you invite me to
your America to teach,
I only have to bring my thumb.
NARRATOR: This clinic has
an x-ray machine, which
each doctor uses for diagnosis.
Dr. Luo is proud of
the way this clinic is
open to Western techniques and
any modality that will help
their patients heal faster.
The open mindedness
of the Luo family,
like many qigong
doctors in China,
is part of their great gift.
They combine artistry
and a deep love
of their culture to enhance
their ability to heal.
Dr. Luo is expert
at Tai Chi swords,
which helps him to build
and balance his internal qi.
He enjoys discussing the
value of combining qigong
with clinical treatments.
DR LUO JIN DIAN:
[SPEAKING CHINESE]
INTERPRETER: The
Chinese have a proverb.
It is better not to use a knife
when trying to heal someone.
Surgery causes much
discomfort in a patient.
We don't use it
unless it's necessary.
If Western medicine is best.
We use those techniques.
If Eastern is
correct, we use that.
Qigong is useful in
treatment and in reducing
the recovery time.
Traditional Chinese
medicine says
that if the acupuncture
meridians move slowly,
then things are not well.
The patient gets
painful sensations.
Qi must move
through the meridian
smoothly in order to heal.
And this theory applies to
bone-related diseases as well.
NARRATOR: At the core
of the Luo family
philosophy is a
desire to help us.
Master Luo's qigong
is intention and where
one's heart needs to be.
[SPEAKING CHINESE]
INTERPRETER: The force from
the heart can do many things.
Many forces come
from the inside,
not only physical strength.
I may be 92, but I'm
still very forceful.
We must do good things for
the people, nothing bad.
This is a socialist after all.
NARRATOR: To Master
Luo, qigong is a process
of acting from a pure heart,
of caring about others,
and visualizing wholeness
and good health.
She is an example of
charity and compassion,
and revered for both
her own healing powers
and the qigong techniques
that she has passed
onto her family and
students so that others
can live a better life.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
NARRATOR: Dr. Wan Su
Jian is a unique example
of a new generation
of qigong masters
to emerge in modern China.
At 43 years old,
Master Wan has been
studying qigong and traditional
Chinese medicine for 36 years.
His mother is a
renowned acupuncturist
in Datong, a coal
mining city far
in the north of the country.
His father, retired director
of a large government run
Western hospital, now assists
his wife in their clinic,
naturally combining
Western procedures
with traditional acupuncture.
They're proud of their
son, who set on hi path
to become a healer
when he was only seven
and who is now considered
one of the most respected
qigong doctors in the country.
MASTER WAN SU JIAN:
[SPEAKING CHINESE]
INTERPRETER: People
come here from all
over the world for treatment
plan, sometimes nearly dying.
How great it is that
we can take ideas
from the Chinese traditional
I Ching and bagua that
are thousands of years
old and use them to keep
us in good health today.
We must continue to do
research, though, to constantly
improve on the past.
NARRATOR: In his own clinic
and training facility nestled
in the outskirts of
Beijing, Master Wan
has created a
learning environment
where young students can take
up qigong as a vocational skill.
Some 40 students at a time
are under his tutelage,
following the age old tradition
of learning from a master
but with the added
practicality of job placement.
The prerequisite
for these student
is three years of study
at a Shaolin temple, where
their strenuous, around
the clock training
brings them discipline
in the fundamentals
of qigong and Kung Fu.
As many of the students
arrive here at age 15,
it means their family send them
to Shaolin at the age of 11
or 12, taking them out of
a traditional schooling
and into this live-in,
learning environment.
What these young people lack
in geometry and science,
they more than make up with
practical medical training
and an inner strength
and humbleness one rarely
sees in their generation.
Master Wan, a father
himself with the state limit
of one child, is a born leader.
He has served 30
years in the Red Army,
rising high in the ranks, while
pursuing his medical career.
His strength at
qigong brought him
notoriety and freedom within
the military establishment.
And he was given his
own qigong hospital.
He has now created a unique
training facility with patients
from all over the world are
treated as his reputation
as a healer continues to rise.
Master Wan combines an ancient
Daoist qigong system, called
Bagua Xundoa Gong with
traditional Chinese medicine
to achieve his great
success with paralysis,
cancer patients, and a
wide variety of diseases.
This system of qigong
utilizes the practitioner's
emitted weiqi to affect that
qi field of the patient.
The qigong practitioners help
to restore a healthy balance
by moving their hands
in a specific way
around the patient.
It is believed that everyone has
a qi around and through them.
The proper manipulation
of this field
is a step in the
process of healing.
This manipulation is done by
the passing of the practitioners
hand through this
field in helping
to bring about a shift
and a restructuring of qi,
while infusing them
with qi from nature.
Some practitioners seem to have
better success than others.
And Master Wan's unique style
of having several qigong doctors
working on a single
patient has proven
to bring about profound
and lasting results.
He continually
explores new techniques
and combines them with
is emitted qi treatments.
Like all qigong masters,
Dr. Wan practices
inner and other
exercises to replenish
and strengthened his qi.
The strenuous regiment he
puts his students through
has helped to create a powerful
team of young qigong masters.
He constantly lectures
on the importance
of this self-discipline, not
only for the practitioner,
but also for the patient.
A major key in
successful qigong healing
is followup practice by a
patient after their treatment.
And this is what he attributes
to his high success rate.
Master Wan's Japanese patients
have created rehabilitation
groups where they
loyally practice
qigong exercises
after they return home
from their week-long treatment.
As Daoist, Master
Wan's qigong training
emphasizes a
connection with nature,
gathering yin qi from the
Earth and yang qi from the sky.
He teaches that this balance of
yin and yang from the universe
around us reflects inner balance
that we need in order to heal.
Healing in the qigong philosophy
is not only of the body
but also the mind and spirit.
These three aspects
of our nature
are inseparable and, thus, must
be treated as a coherent whole.
Like Master Duan and
Master Luo, Master Wan
lives by the philosophy
that compassion
and virtue are the
keys to a healthy life
and to success as a healer.
Money should never be
a motivating force,
as it will only weaken your qi.
They all believe
that if you follow
the path of a virtuous
life, and a life of balance,
you will be provided for in
ways that are best suited
for your unfolding and growth.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
NARRATOR: Qigong has also
captured the interest
of the scientific community.
Their hope is to
somehow quantify
qi and then regenerate it.
The leading pioneer in this area
is Lu Yanfang, affectionately
known as Engineer Lu.
The groundbreaking work
at the Electro-Acoustical
Research Institute is well
respected around the world.
15 years ago, Engineer
Lu had the idea
that the qi emissions
from qigong masters
could be somehow
measured acoustically.
In the institute's
anechoic chamber,
she suspended a highly sensitive
microphone near the Laogong
point in their palms, a
traditional acupressure point
where healing qi is emitted.
Upon demand, these
masters could emit
a low frequency audio signal
in the 8 to 14 Hertz range.
It was a chaotic signal with
an ever changing pattern.
She tested many average adults
who showed no such pattern
but did find that young
children exhibited
similar audio emissions.
The result of this research
was the development of a qigong
machine, a handheld
device that actually
replicates this audio
portion of the qi emission.
Co-developed and marketed
by China Healthways in San
Clemente California,
this device is
used by thousands of
physicians and chiropractors
in the United States.
Testimonials of
chronic pain relief,
energy boosting, and the
reduction of swelling
from sprains are numerous.
Although qi is
considered by authorities
to be a more complex radiation
than just an audio waveform,
the qigong machine is an
example of what may lie ahead,
as we take qigong more
seriously and delve deeper
into the mysterious nature qi.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
NARRATOR: Applying
scientific research methods
to obtain results on the
healing properties of qi
has its challenges,
but is leading us
to a deeper understanding
of the elusive force.
Dr. Kenneth Sancier, president
and founder of the Qigong
Institute in Menlo
Park, California,
is considered one of
the foremost authorities
on this field of research.
Now retired from is
35-year tenure as director
of the Stanford
Research Institute,
his deep respect by the
international scientific
community brings credibility and
objectivity to qigong research.
Well, I think we
have to look to China
to find out what kind
of research is going on.
Over the period of since 1980s,
a huge amount of research
has been reported
in the literature.
But that literature
is mainly in Chinese.
So in order to make
that information
accessible to Western
people, the Qigong Institute
put together the Qigong
computerized database,
which permits people to search
with any keyword for a disease
or any other condition.
And they're about 1,300
references in that database.
There's been research done
showing that the emitted qi
sent from a qigong master will
increase the rate of growth
of seedlings, mushrooms.
Qigong is a therapy for
chronic conditions primarily,
although not exclusively,
whereas Western medicine
is primarily for
acute conditions,
like the surgery or bacterial
infections and so forth.
So these two can-- the Western
and the Eastern approach
can be worked together.
And they should
be complimentary,
because they're dealing with
different aspects of healing.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
NARRATOR: Most of
the exploration
into the healing
powers of qigong
is going on outside
of the laboratories.
In parks throughout China,
over 80 million people
practice qigong each day.
You can witness the
myriad styles in any town
and province you visit.
The therapeutic aspects
of this health care system
are usually achieved through
slow moving exercises.
Yet some styles
involve simply sitting.
Others would rather
apply it toward what
looks like traditional dancing.
From here in Shanghai to
1,000 miles away in Luoyang,
massive crowds dance their
qigong to the guidance
of a master instructor.
Another aspect of qigong lies
within Tai Chi sword play.
Like Master Duan, these students
believe the metal in the sword
helps to absorb qi
into their bodies.
Most people may not think
of calligraphy as qigong.
But several master
artists are renowned
for their healing
powers that they
impart through their artwork.
There is a belief
that their powerful qi
is passed into
the finished piece
and can benefit
those who view it.
84-year-old Master
Lu lives in Chengdu,
an ancient city near the
Tibetan border of China.
He sees the paint brush and
the sword as one in the same,
as it is qi that
animates them both.
His grace and elegance
are the reflection
of the refined qi he has
cultivated over years of study.
At Master Jiang's
Heavenly Dragon Temple,
loyal students are taught the
subtle aspects of strengthening
and applying qi to all they do.
Across the country at
the Shi Fung Yuan Temple,
Master Sun Ming Wie creates
beautiful artwork while
in a deep qigong meditation.
A Daoist monk, he
lives an austere life
in this mountaintop retreat.
He says that he never had
any artistic tendencies
until late in his 80 year life.
One day after years of qigong
practice in one of the temple's
gardens, he said he saw
the essence of the flowers
in that moment and
deeply understood
his connection to them.
He picked up a paintbrush
for the first time
and began to paint.
His art is now considered
a national treasure.
And each piece he
finishes is carefully
wrapped and ship to an
official caretaker in Beijing.
This Daoist temple is typical
in that all of the monks
are trained to apply their
qigong to creative outlets.
These monks, the Daosha,
are vegetarian musicians.
They play traditional
Daoist temple music
in the heightened qigong state,
thus, imparting to the listener
the strength and healing
balance of their qi.
A small group has been
trained since childhood
to develop their qi
in order to perform
extraordinary physical feats.
Much like the Shaolin monks with
their acts of supreme skill,
these young men focus
much of their waking
energy to mastering
techniques that defy physics.
These feats are part of
their qigong training.
By learning to build their
weiqi, or protective qi,
they're able to strengthen
their bodies in order
to master these skills.
These extreme feats serve to
inspire others to practice even
basic qigong techniques
for self-healing
and general well-being.
In Tibet, qigong seems
to be incorporated
into the very
fabric of daily life
for these gentle Buddhists.
When we think of
this country, we
are reminded of the austere
life of the monks who
live in the few
remaining temples
throughout this magical land.
Their qigong is
practiced in prayer,
mostly performed in silence
with gentle chanting.
For the Tibetans, the use of
repetitive sounds, or mantras,
is key to obtaining the
healing benefits of qigong.
The average Tibetan journeys
to a temple each week
and walks around and around
it, chanting a specific mantra.
Coming on horseback or by foot
for miles on severe terrain,
the Tibetan knows the value of
this walking qigong practice.
To these spiritual people,
each moment of every day
is an opportunity to honor
life, to appreciate the beauty
and power of the
universe, and to accept
all that comes to them with
an open and loving heart.
[TRAFFIC SOUNDS]
Within China, like all growing
industrialized countries,
there is a major concern
about managing the health
care needs of the people.
As in the West, rising
health care costs
are presenting a
tremendous financial burden
on valuable limited resources.
The Chinese government
has been looking
seriously at the
possibility of qigong
to relieve some
of this pressure.
Deep in Hebbei province,
Master Zhi Chen Guo
has been developing a
qigong style that he feels
is actually transcending
what we know as qigong.
His system is known
as Zhi Neng medicine.
It combines qigong with both
traditional Chinese medicine
and Western medical theory.
2 million loyal students
practice it regularly
and claim incredible results.
At his treatment center,
an 1,100 bed clinic
is combined with
an herbal pharmacy
and training center,
capable of handling
5,000 students at one time.
The select students that
are invited to come here,
travel by bicycle and
bus from around China
to learn from Master Guo.
They believe his
qi energy, combined
with the various exercises they
perform for hours at a time,
help in their
training and healing.
In fact, many come
here to heal themselves
from all forms of disease.
Guo's system involves
both qigong exercises
and various herb combinations
that he prescribes just
by glancing at the patient.
With his team of doctors,
he's able to treat hundreds
of people a day at his clinic.
Because of these
profound results,
this low cost and
effective system
appeals greatly
to the government.
Many Zhi Neng medicine
support groups
are growing around the
country and are overseen
by the local government
agencies that
are proud of the responsibility
individuals are taking
to maintain their health.
Master Guo is now
hoping to share
his system with Westerners.
To this end, he has selected a
renowned Chinese medical doctor
to be his representative
in the West.
This man, Dr. Zhi
Gang Sha is both
a Western-trained
physician, as well as
a traditional Chinese doctor,
who's taught in Beijing
at the World Health
Organization's
international medical center.
Dr. Sha, a qigong
master, who began
his training at the
age of 7, is now
the adopted son of Master Guo.
Has been given
the responsibility
of spreading the healing
power of Zhi Neng medicine
to the West.
Dr. Sha has moved to Canada and
has recently visited America
to begin this process of
teaching what he and Master Guo
feel will be the
force of self-healing
for the 21st century.
The system utilizes special
sounds and hand positioning
to help unblock stagnant qi
that causes chronic pain.
For difficult cases, he uses a
unique form of acupuncture that
utilizes only 12 acupoints.
Dr. Sha inserts the
needles very quickly,
but says he uses his qi to
enhance the healing effects.
The claims of his healing
abilities and those
are the various Zhi Neng
medicine techniques grow daily.
And Western physicians
are beginning
to take a serious look
at how these new healing
modalities may eventually
complement Western medicine.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
NARRATOR: Qigong, the 5,000
year old healing modality,
has evolved and adapted
itself to the times,
continuously molded by
its various teachers.
Although thousands
of different styles
have emerged over the
millennia, the common threads
the tie sincere proponents
of this healing system
together remain the same.
The first key is the breath.
Every form of qigong
puts great emphasis
on deep, diaphragmatic
breathing.
Though there may
be many techniques
to manipulate the
breath, the fact
remains that if one can devote
some attention to focused
yet relaxed deep breathing,
they will experience
a certain level of benefit.
As relaxation relieves
a body of stress,
the immune system
has less work to do
and more energy can be
devoted to staying healthy.
Intentional deep breathing
will also supply the body
with more oxygen,
the fuel it needs
to repair and maintain health.
The second key is slow, gentle
movement and stretching.
With physical flexibility
comes mental flexibility.
When deep breath is combined
with slow, synchronized
movement, the body builds
more energy, or qi,
rather than depleting
energy, which happens
with strenuous exercise.
When the body moves
with the breath,
many people experience a
sense of calm and harmony.
This sensation helps to bring
the body and mind into balance
and contributes to our
physical and mental healing.
Qigong is not tied to any
religious belief system.
Although it has been
influenced over the millennia
by much philosophical
thought, people from all
walks of life practice qigong.
It is common that practitioners
experience both a deep sense
of calm and increased vitality.
Many say it has
changed the way they
look at life as if their
senses have just been awakened.
Many authorities agree that
healing is heavily influenced
by one state of mind.
It is thought that if a person
is more positive and at ease,
they will successfully
contribute
to their own healing.
Qigong appears to have
the potential of being
a simple technique that
can be learned by anyone
and provides tangible
results that even
scientists can quantify.
Of great interest to all
is that practising qigong
can cut down hospitalization
time and cost,
reduce the amount of medication
one needs during convalescence,
and promote healing
in diseases ranging
from hypertension to cancer.
In a word, qigong
has the potential
of drastically reducing
the cost of health care.
Most importantly, qigong
offers a way for individuals
to take responsibility
for their own health
and to alleviate the sense of
helplessness that often exists
in today's health care system.
With health care
costs skyrocketing,
the Chinese and a growing
number of Westerners
believe qigong is an
opportunity for motivated people
to become more involved
in their own physical,
mental, and spiritual health.
Qigong may become a
powerful complement to
our current healing modalities.
It is an ancient Chinese healing
system that honors the past
and provides the
tools that can enable
us to truly help
others and ourselves
as we enter the 21st century.
[MUSIC PLAYING]